# Compiler Design

## Template Processor

TBD


## Parser

The <code>scaledmarkets.dabl.parser</code> class parses input. This class is
generated by the [SableCC parser generator](http://www.sablecc.org/),
based on the input grammar file,
[dabl.sablecc](https://github.com/Scaled-Markets/dabl/blob/master/dabl.sablecc).


## Language Analyzer

The <code>LanguageAnalyzer</code> class performs the Analysis processing phase
(see https://github.com/Scaled-Markets/dabl/tree/master/langref#processing-phases).
It uses the following:

<dl>
	<dd><code>Compiler state</code> - </dd>
	<dd><dl>
		<dd><code>ast</code> - </dd>
		<dd><code>globalScope</code> - </dd>
		<dd><code>scopeStack</code> - </dd>
		<dd><code>in</code> - </dd>
		<dd><code>out</code> - </dd>
	</dl></dd>
	
	<dd><code>NameScope</code></dd>
	
	<dd><code>DablBaseAdapter</code> (extends <code>DepthFirstAdapter</code>) - 
		Base class for <code>LanguageAnalyzer</code>. Key methods include:
		<dl>
		<dd><code>addSymbolEntry(SymbolEntry entry, TId id, NameScope enclosingScope)</code> -
			Adds the specified symbol table entry for the specified Id to
			the specified name scope.</dd>
		<dd><code>createNameScope(Node node)</code> - Create a new NameScope within the current
			NameScope, push the new NameScope on the scope stack, and annotate
			the specified Node with the new NameScope.</dd>
		<dd><code>setExprAnnotation(POexpr node, Object value)</code> - Annotate the specified
			POExpr node with a new ExprAnnotation.</dd>
		<dd><code>setExprRefAnnotation(POexpr node, Object value, SymbolEntry entry)</code> - 
			Annotate the specified POexpr node with a new ExprRefAnnotation.</dd>
		</dl>
		
	<dd><code>SymbolTable</code> (a <code>HashMap<String, SymbolEntry>)</code> -
		Self explanatory.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>SymbolEntry</code> (abstract) - All symbol table entries are of a
		derived type.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>DeclaredEntry</code> (extends <code>SymbolEntry</code>) - A symbol
		that is defined in a declaration.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>NameScopeEntry</code> (extends <code>DeclaredEntry</code>) - A
		<code>DeclaredEntry</code> that defines a lexical name scope.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>Annotation</code> (abstract) - Base type for all AST node annotations.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>NameScope</code> (extends <code>Annotation</code>) - All Axxx classes
		that define a lexical scope should be annotated with this. A
		<code>NameScope</code> contains a <code>SymbolTable</code>.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>ExprAnnotation</code> (extends <code>Annotation</code>) - An annotation
		for a expression node.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>ExprRefAnnotation</code> (extends <code>ExprAnnotation</code>) -
		For expressions whose value is defined in the declaration of a symbol.</dd>
	
	<dd><code>IdentHandler</code> - An <code>IdentHandler</code> is attached to
		enclosing scopes when a symbol
		is not recognized but might be defined later in an enclosing scope. Later,
		when the symbol is defined, attached Handlers are checked to see if any
		refer to the symbol. If so, the Handler's resolveRetroactively method
		is called, to resolve the original symbol reference.</dd>

</dl>

## Compiler Output

The compiler returns a [`CompilerState`](CompilerState.java) object. In the
`CompilerState`, the `globalScope` variable references the root level
[`NameScope`](NameScope.java) object.
A `NameScope` references a [`SymbolTable`](SymbolTable.java) consisting of
[`SymbolEntries`](SymbolEntry.java).
`SymbolEntries` that are [`NameScopeEntries`](NameScopeEntry.java) own their
own `NameScopes`,
which in turn reference their own `SymbolTables`, creating a hierarchy
of `NameScopes`.

The compiler builds an abstract syntax tree (AST), which is defined by the
Abstract Syntax Tree section of the
[dabl.sablecc](https://github.com/Scaled-Markets/dabl/blob/master/dabl.sablecc)
file,
and which can be accessed via the methods in the generated `scaledmarkets.dabl.node` package.
